Recursive procedures
are procedures
that are defined in
terms of themselves.
So basically that means
that an implementation
of recursive procedure
will at least contain one
call to the procedure itself.
And that may remind you a little
bit of mathematical induction,
where you have a
base case, and you
have a complex case which
you reduce to a simpler case,
which you reduce
to simpler case,
and so on until you
arrive at the base case.
So it's often very
natural to translate
some mathematical algorithm
into a recursive implementation.
However, that may come with
some performance issues.
As a simple example, Let's
consider the Fibonacci
function.
So it's recursive
because Fibonacci of n
can be defined as the sum
of Fibonacci n minus 1
and Fibonacci n minus 2.
And there is also a base
case, which deals with n
is equal to 0 and
n is equal to 1.
In that case, the
Fibonacci number is just 1.
When we compile the code,
you see that we get an error.
So the error message says that
the function fibonacci cannot
be called recursively
since it is not recursive.
Indeed, we need to fix this.
Early specifications
of Fortran did not
allow for recursive procedures,
that just could not happen.
And at some point, it was
decided that support for it
was required, and this
was done by introducing
a keyword, recursive,
that has to be prepended
to the procedure declaration.
So this is a little bit
peculiar for Fortran,
and you just have to
remember that if you
want a procedure to be recursive
to use that recursive keyword.
Now the code compiles
without issues.
But when we run it you see that
we got a segmentation fault,
and that's of
course not so nice.
So what can we do?
We can recompile the code
with support for debugging,
and we can run the code under
the control of a debugger, GDB
in this case.
So the debugger starts and we
have to run our application.
We can do that just
by typing r for run.
And then you see that of course
we get segmentation fault,
and the statement
that happens in
is in the recursive
computation of the value
of the fibonacci function.
Let's do a backtrace,
basically displaying
the call stack of all procedures
that have been called up
to this point.
And then you see that
it is pretty long.
So basically, we get
fibonacci functions calling
fibonacci functions, and so on.
Of course we expect that,
but perhaps not that many.
And as you can see this
goes on, and on, and on,
and probably there's a
problem here somewhere.
Let's run the application again,
but let's pause it at line 13,
so basically in each call
of the fibonacci function.
And we can do that by setting
a breakpoint at line 13,
and we run the
application again.
Yes, we want to restart it.
And now as you can see,
the application halts
in line 13 and we
can for instance,
have a look what the
value of the argument is.
And it's 5, so that's fine
because that was indeed
the argument we called the
fibonacci function with.
We can continue to the next
breakpoint, print n again,
and you can see it's
4, so that's fine.
Indeed, the function calls
itself recursively each time
with a smaller value
of the argument n.
And we can continue
a couple of times.
For instance, let's ignore
a number of breakpoints
and stop after the
fifth iteration.
And let's print n again.
Hm, n is equal to minus 1.
That of course shouldn't happen.
So basically it has the cause
of the problem, and most likely
you already spotted what it is.
Let's quit the debugger, just
q, and let's fix our problem.
The fibonacci function
kept on calling itself
with ever smaller
values of the argument.
So typically that means that
the base case is not OK.
And indeed, you probably
already spotted the problem.
We have n is equal to
0 and n is equal to 1,
and that very rarely
happens in this universe.
So basically the
logical and should just
be replaced by a logical or.
So now the code is fixed,
we recompile again,
and when we execute
the application
you see that we get
the expected output.
Indeed, the fibonacci
number for 5 is 8.
As you've already
guessed, this video
was actually not so much
about recursion but rather
about using a debugger.
But that's a really useful
skill, and something
you should get into
the habit of doing.